The Project Gutenberg eBook of The social center a means of common understanding
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The social center a means of common understanding
        An address delivered by the Hon. Woodrow Wilson, Governor of New Jersey, before the First National Conference on Civic and Social....


Author: Woodrow Wilson

Release date: December 2, 2023 [eBook #72293]

Language: English

Original publication: Madison: The University of Wisconsin, 1894

Credits: Bob Taylor, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOCIAL CENTER A MEANS OF COMMON UNDERSTANDING ***




  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  BULLETIN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
  Serial No. 470: General Series, No. 306.

  EXTENSION DIVISION

  OF

  THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN

  GENERAL INFORMATION AND WELFARE

  THE SOCIAL CENTER

  A MEANS OF COMMON UNDERSTANDING

  An address delivered by Hon. Woodrow Wilson, Governor
  of New Jersey, before the First National Conference
  on Civic and Social Center Development, at Madison,
  Wis., October 25, 1911.

  PRICE 5 CENTS

  MADISON
  Published by the University
  December, 1911

  Entered as second-class matter June 10, 1898, at the post office at
  Madison, Wisconsin, under the Act of July 16, 1891




UNIVERSITY EXTENSION DIVISION


DEPARTMENT OF CORRESPONDENCE-STUDY

 One or more courses are offered in each of the following lines for
 home-study.

  _Agriculture_
  _Business and Industry_
  _Engineering_
      Electrical, Mechanical, Civil
  _Mechanical Drawing_
  _Surveying_
  _Highway Construction_
  _The Languages_
      French, Italian, Spanish, German, Greek, Latin
  _History_
      Ancient, Medieval, Modern, American, European
  _Home Economics_
  _Political Economy_
  _Political Science_
  _Sociology_
  _Philosophy_
  _Education_
  _Mathematics_
  _English Language and Literature_
  _Physical Sciences_
      Bacteriology, Botany, Geology, Chemistry, Astronomy
  _Law_
  _Pharmacy_
  _Music_
  _Teachers’ Reviews_

Any one or all of the above departmental announcements will be mailed
to any address on request.


DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION BY LECTURES

 A bulletin descriptive of lectures and lecture courses will be mailed
 to any address on request.


DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL INFORMATION AND WELFARE

 Bulletins descriptive of this department, including Municipal
 Reference, Civic and Social Center, and Vocational Institute work,
 mailed on request.


DEPARTMENT OF DEBATING AND PUBLIC DISCUSSION

 Bulletins on debating and the discussion of public questions will be
 mailed on request without charge to citizens of the state. Copies will
 be mailed to addresses outside the state upon receipt of list price.




The University of Wisconsin

UNIVERSITY EXTENSION DIVISION

Department of General Information and Welfare

  MADISON, WIS.


OFFICERS OF ADMINISTRATION

 CHARLES RICHARD VAN HISE, Ph. D., LL. D. President of the University

 LOUIS E. REBER, M. S., Sc. D. Dean, University Extension Division

 EDWARD J. WARD, M. A. Adviser, Bureau of Civic and Social Center
 Development.




THE SOCIAL CENTER

A MEANS OF COMMON UNDERSTANDING


 An address delivered by Hon. Woodrow Wilson, Governor of New Jersey,
 before the First National Conference on Civic and Social Center
 Development, at Madison, Wis., October 25, 1911.

I do not feel that I have deserved the honor of standing here upon
this occasion to make what has been courteously called the principal
address, because five months ago I did not know anything about this
movement. I have taken no active part in it, and I am not going to
assume, as those who have preceded me have assumed, that you know what
the movement is. I want, if for no other purpose than to clarify my own
thinking, to state as briefly as possible, what the movement is.

The object of the movement is to make the schoolhouse the civic center
of the community, at any rate in such communities as are supplied with
no other place of common resort.


Ready for Use—The Means of Concerting Common Life

It is obvious that the schoolhouse is in most communities used only
during certain hours of the day, those hours when the rest of the
community is busily engaged in bread-winning work. It occurred to the
gentlemen who started this movement that inasmuch as the schoolhouses
belonged to the community it was perfectly legitimate that the
community should use them for its own entertainment and schooling when
the young people were not occupying them. And that, therefore, it
would be a good idea to have there all sorts of gatherings, for social
purposes, for purposes of entertainment, for purposes of conference,
for any legitimate thing that might bring neighbors and friends
together in the schoolhouses. That, I understand it, in its simplest
terms is the civic center movement—that the schoolhouses might be made
a place of meeting—in short, where by meeting each other the people
of a community might know each other, and by knowing each other might
concert a common life, a common action.


Spontaneous Development

The study of the civic center is the study of the spontaneous life of
communities. What you do is to open the schoolhouse and light it in the
evening and say: “Here is a place where you are welcome to come and do
anything that it occurs to you to do.”

And the interesting thing about this movement is that a great many
things have occurred to people to do in the schoolhouse, things social,
things educational, things political,—for one of the reasons why
politics took on a new complexion in the city in which this movement
originated was that the people who could go into the schoolhouses at
night knew what was going on in that city and insisted upon talking
about it, and the minute they began talking about it, many things
became impossible, for there are scores of things that must be put a
stop to in our politics that will stop the moment they are talked of
where men will listen. The treatment for bad politics is exactly the
modern treatment for tuberculosis—it is exposure to the open air.

Now you have to begin at the root of the matter in order to understand
what it is you intend to serve by this movement. You intend to serve
the life of communities, the life that is there, the life that you
cannot create, the life to which you can only give release and
opportunity; and wherein does that life consist? That is the question
that interests me. There can be no life in a community so long as its
parts are segregated and separated. It is just as if you separated
the organs of the human body and then expected them to produce life.
You must open wide the channels of sympathy and communication between
them, you must make channels for the tides of life; if you clog them
anywhere, if you stop them anywhere, why then the processes of disease
set in, which are the processes of misunderstanding, which are the
disconnections between the spiritual impulses of different sections of
men.


Common Center Essential to Community Life

The very definition of community is a body of men who have things in
common, who are conscious that they have things in common, who judge
those common things from a single point of view, namely, the point of
view of general interest. Such a thing as a community is unthinkable,
therefore, unless you have close communication; there must be a vital
inter-relationship of parts, there must be a fusion, there must be a
coördination, there must be a free intercourse, there must be such a
contact as will constitute union itself before you will have the true
course of the wholesome blood throughout the body.

Therefore, when you analyze some of our communities you will see just
how necessary it is to get their parts together. Take some of our great
cities for example. Do you not realize by common gossip even, the
absolute disconnection of what we call their residential sections from
the rest of the city? Isn’t it singular that while human beings live
all over a city, we pick out a part, a place where there are luxurious
and well-appointed houses and call that the residential section? As
if nobody else lived anywhere in that city. That is the place where
the most disconnected part and in some instances the most useless
part of the community lives. There men do not know their next-door
neighbors; there men do not want to know their next-door neighbors;
there is no bond of sympathy; there is no bond of knowledge or common
acquaintanceship.

I am not speaking of these things to impeach a class, for I know of no
just way in which to impeach a class.

It is necessary that such portions of the community should be linked
with the other portions; it is necessary that simple means should be
found by which by an interchange of points of view we may get together,
for the whole process of modern life, the whole process of modern
politics, is a process by which we must exclude misunderstandings,
exclude hostilities, exclude deadly rivalries, make men understand
other men’s interests, bring all men into common counsel, and so
discover what is the common interest.

That is the problem of modern life which is so specialized that it is
almost devitalized, so disconnected that the tides of life will not
flow.


Means to the Unity of Communities

My interest in this movement, as it has been described to me, has
been touched with enthusiasm because I see in it a channel for the
restoration of the unity of communities. Because I am told that things
have already happened which bear promise of this very thing.

I was told what is said to be a typical story of a very fine lady, a
woman of very fine natural parts, but very fastidious, whose automobile
happened to be stalled one night in front of an open schoolhouse where
a meeting was going on over which her seamstress was presiding. She
was induced by some acquaintances of hers whom she saw going into the
building, to go in, and was at first filled with disdain; she didn’t
like the looks of some of the people, there was too much mixture of
the sort she didn’t care to associate with—an employe of her own was
presiding—but she was obliged to stay a little while, it was the most
comfortable place to stay while her automobile was repaired, and before
she could get away she had been touched with the generous contagion of
the place. Here were people of all sorts talking about things that were
interesting, that revealed to her things that she had never dreamed of
before with regard to the vital common interests of persons whom she
had always thought unlike herself, so that the community of the human
heart was revealed to her, the singleness of human life.


Worth Any Effort to Promote

Now if this thing does that, it is worth any effort to promote it. If
it will do that, it is the means by which we shall create communities.
And nothing else will produce liberty—you cannot have liberty where
men do not want the same liberty, you cannot have it where they are
not in sympathy with one another, you cannot have it where they do not
understand one another, you cannot have it when they are not seeking
common things by common means, you simply cannot have it; we must study
the means by which these things are produced.

In the first place, don’t you see that you produce communities by
creating common feeling? I know that a great emphasis is put upon
the mind, in our day, and as a university man I should perhaps not
challenge the supremacy of the intellect, but I have never been
convinced that mind was really monarch in our day, or in any day that
I have yet read of, or, if it is monarch, it is one of the modern
monarchs that rules and reigns but does not govern.


Common Feeling Essential to Free Government

What really controls our action is feeling. We are governed by the
passions and the most that we can manage by all our social and
political endeavors is that the handsome passions shall be in the
majority—the passion of sympathy, the passion of justice, the passion
of fair dealing, the passion of unselfishness, (if it may be elevated
into a passion). If you can once see that a working majority is
obtained for the handsome passions, for the feelings that draw us
together, rather than for the feelings that separate us, then you
have laid the foundation of a community and a free government and,
therefore, if you can do nothing else in the community center than draw
men together so that they will have common feeling, you will have set
forward the cause of civilization and the cause of human freedom.

As a basis of the common feeling you must have a mutual comprehension.
The fundamental truth in modern life, as I analyze it, is a profound
ignorance. I am not one of those who challenge the promoters of special
interests on the ground that they are malevolent, that they are bad
men; I challenge their leadership on the ground that they are ignorant
men, that when you have absorbed yourself in a particular business
through half your life, you have no other point of view than the point
of view of that business and that, therefore, you are disqualified by
ignorance from giving counsel as to the common interests.

A witty English writer once said: “If you chain a man’s head to a
ledger and knock off something from his wages every time he stops
adding up, you can’t expect him to have enlightened views about the
antipodes.” Simply, if you immerse a man in a given undertaking, no
matter how big that undertaking is, and keep him immersed for half a
life time, you can’t expect him to see any horizon, you can’t expect
him to see human life steadily or see it whole.


Means to Liberal Education

I once made this statement that a university was intended to make young
people just as unlike their fathers as possible. By which I do not mean
anything disrespectful to their fathers, but merely this, by the time a
man is old enough to have children in college, his point of view is apt
to have become so specialized that they would better be taken away from
him and put in a place where their views of life will be regeneralized
and they will be disconnected from the family and connected with the
world. That, I understand to be the function of education, of the
liberal education.

Now a kind of liberal education must underlie every wholesome political
and social process, the kind of liberal education which connects a
man’s feeling and his comprehension with the general run of mankind,
which disconnects him from the special interests and marries his
thought to the common interests of great communities and of great
cities and of great states and of great nations, and, if possible,
with that brotherhood of man that transcends the boundaries of nations
themselves.

Those are the horizons to my mind of this social center movement, that
they are going to unite the feelings and clarify the comprehension of
communities, of bodies of men who draw together in conference.


Conference Always Modifies and Improves Thought

I would like to ask if this is not the experience of every person here
who has ever acted in any conference of any kind. Did you ever go out
of a conference with exactly the same views with which you went in? If
you did, I am sorry for you, you must be thought-tight. For my part I
can testify that I never carried a scheme into a conference without
having it profoundly modified by the criticism of the other men in the
conference and without recognizing when I came out that the product
of the common council bestowed upon it was very much superior to any
private thought that might have been used for its development. The
processes of attrition, the contributions to consensus of minds, the
compromises of thought create those general movements which are the
streams of tendency and the streams of development.


Will Make Easier Solution of Great Problems

And so it seems to me that what is going to be produced by this
movement,—not all at once, by slow and tedious stages, no doubt,
but nevertheless very certainly in the end,—is in the first place a
release of common forces now undiscovered, now somewhere banked up,
and now somewhere unavailable, the removal of barriers to the common
understanding, the opening of mind to mind, the clarification of the
air and the release in that clarified air of forces that can live in
it, and just so certainly as you release those forces you make easier
the fundamental problem of modern society, which is the problem of
accommodating the various interests in modern society to one another.


Adjustment Necessary to Liberty

I used to teach my classes in the university that liberty was a matter
of adjustment and I was accustomed to illustrate it in this way; when
you have perfectly assembled the parts of a great steam engine, for
example, then when it runs, you say that it runs free; that means that
the adjustment is so perfect that the friction is reduced to a minimum,
doesn’t it, and the minute you twist any part out of alignment, the
minute you lose adjustment, then there is a buckling up and the whole
thing is rigid and useless. Now to my mind, that is the image of
human liberty; the individual is free in proportion to his perfect
accommodation to the whole, or to put it the other way, in proportion
to the perfect adjustment of the whole to his life and interests.

Take another illustration; you are sailing a boat, when do you say that
she is running free, when you have thrown her up into the wind? No,
not at all. Every stick and stitch in her shivers and you say she is
in irons; nature has grasped her and says: “You cannot go that way;”
but let her fall off, let the sheet fill and see her run like a bird
skimming the waters. Why is she free? Because she has adjusted herself
to the great force of nature that is brewed with the breath of the
wind. She is free in proportion as she is adjusted, as she is obedient,
and so men are free in society in proportion as their interests are
accommodated to one another, and that is the problem of liberty.


Analysis Accomplished—Now Assembled

Liberty as now expressed is unsatisfactory in this country and in
other countries because there has not been a satisfactory adjustment
and you cannot readjust the parts until you analyze them. Very well,
we have analyzed them. Now this movement is intended to contribute
to an effort to assemble them, bring them together, let them look one
another in the face, let them reckon with one another and then they
will coöperate and not before.

You cannot bring adjustment into play until you have got the consent of
the parts to act together, and then when you have got the adjustment,
when you have discovered and released those forces and they have
accommodated themselves to each other, you have that control which is
the sovereignty of the people.

There is no sovereignty of the people if the several sections of the
people be at loggerheads with one another; sovereignty comes with
coöperation, sovereignty comes with mutual protection, sovereignty
comes with the quick pulses of sympathy, sovereignty comes by a common
impulse.

You say and all men say that great political changes are impending in
this country. Why do you say so? Because everywhere you go you find
men expressing the same judgment, alive to the same circumstances,
determined to solve the problems by acting together no matter what
older bonds they may break, no matter what former prepossessions they
may throw off, determined to get together and do the thing.


Enlightened Control in Place of Management

And so you know that changes are impending because what was a body
of scattered sentiment is now becoming a concentrated force, and so
with sympathy and understanding comes control, for, in place of this
control of enlightened and sovereign opinions, we have had in the field
of politics as elsewhere, the reign of management, and management is
compounded of these two things, secrecy plus concentration.

You cannot manage a nation, you cannot manage the people of a state,
you cannot manage a great population, you can manage only some central
force; what you do, therefore, if you want to manage in politics or
anywhere else is to choose a great single force or single group of
forces, and then find some man or men sagacious and secretive enough to
manage the business without being discovered. And that has been done
for a generation in the United States.

Now, the schoolhouse among other things is going to break that up. Is
it not significant that this thing is being erected upon the foundation
originally laid in America, where we saw from the first that the
schoolhouse and the church were to be the pillars of the Republic? Is
it not significant that as if by instinct we return to those sources
of liberty undefiled which we find in the common meeting place, in the
place owned by everybody, in the place where nobody can be excluded, in
the place to which everybody comes as by right?

And so what we are doing is simply to open what was shut, to let the
light come in upon places that were dark, to substitute for locked
doors, open doors, for it does not make any difference how many or how
few come in provided anybody who chooses may come in. So as soon as you
have established that principle, you have openings, and these doors are
open as if they were the flood gates of life.


Faith In People Justified

I do not wonder that men are exhibiting an increased confidence in the
judgments of the people, because wherever you give the people a chance
such as this movement has given them in the schoolhouse, they avail
themselves of it. This is not a false people, this is not a people
guided by blind impulses, this is a people who want to think, who want
to think right, whose feelings are based upon justice, whose instincts
are for fairness and for the light.

So what I see in this movement is a recovery of the constructive and
creative genius of the American people, because the American people as
a people are so far different from others in being able to produce new
things, to create new things out of old.


This Movement Fundamentally American

I have often thought that we overlook the fact that the real sources
of strength in the community come from the bottom. Do you find
society renewing itself from the top? Don’t you find society renewing
itself from the ranks of unknown men? Do you look to the leading
families to go on leading you? Do you look to the ranks of the men
already established in authority to contribute sons to lead the next
generation? They may, sometimes they do, but you can’t count on them;
and what you are constantly depending on is the rise out of the ranks
of unknown men, the discovery of men whom you had passed by, the
sudden disclosure of capacity you had not dreamed of, the emergence
of somebody from some place of which you had thought the least, of
some man unanointed from on high, to do the thing that the generation
calls for. Who would have looked to see Lincoln save a nation? Who that
knew Lincoln when he was a lad and a youth and a young man—but all the
while there was springing up in him as if he were connected with the
very soil itself, the sap of a nation, the vision of a great people, a
sympathy so ingrained and intimate with the common run of men that he
was like the People impersonated, sublimated, touched with genius. And
it is to such sources that we must always look.

No man can calculate the courses of genius, no man can foretell the
leadership of nations. And so we must see to it that the bottom is
left open, we must see to it that the soil of the common feeling of the
common consciousness is always fertile and unclogged, for there can be
no fruit unless the roots touch the rich sources of life.

And it seems to me that the schoolhouses dotted here, there, and
everywhere, over the great expanse of this nation, will some day prove
to be the roots of that great tree of liberty which shall spread for
the sustenance and protection of all mankind.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
  public domain.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOCIAL CENTER A MEANS OF COMMON UNDERSTANDING ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


