The Project Gutenberg eBook of Left hand, right hand
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Left hand, right hand


Author: James H. Schmitz

Illustrator: George Schelling

Release date: November 30, 2023 [eBook #72272]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, 1962

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEFT HAND, RIGHT HAND ***




                         LEFT HAND, RIGHT HAND

                          By JAMES H. SCHMITZ

                       Illustrated by SCHELLING

       _Men were tortured ... men were killed ... and the Earth
          Scientists chatted pleasantly with the Tareeg. Were
         they traitors or were they waiting for The Ice Men?_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Amazing Stories November 1962.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Jerry Newland was sitting up on the side of his bunk, frowning at the
floor, when Troy Gordon came quietly into the room and stopped at the
entrance to watch him. Not too good, Troy thought after a moment,
studying Newland's loose mouth, the slow blinking of the eyes and the
slumped immobility of position. Not too bad either--not for a man who,
in most practical respects, had been dead for the better part of three
years and come awake again only the day before.

But the question was whether Newland was going to recover quickly
enough now to be of any use as an ally.

Troy moved forward a few steps into the room, stopped again as Newland
raised his head in a sluggish motion to stare at him. For a few
seconds, the man's face remained blank. Then he grinned. A strained,
unpleasant-looking grin, but a grin.

Troy waited. Newland cleared his throat, said, "I ... I recognized you
almost immediately this time! And ... I remembered that this same thing
had happened before."

Troy grinned, too, guardedly. "My coming into the room this way?"

Newland nodded.

"It happened yesterday," Troy said. "What's my name?"

"Troy Gordon."

"And yours?"

"Jerry Franklin Newland."

"What do you do?"

"Do?... Oh!" Newland drew a deep breath. "I'm courier pilot for the ...
for the...." He stopped, looking first surprised, then dismayed. Then
his face wrinkled up slowly, like that of a child about to cry.

"That part's gone again, eh?" Troy asked, watching him.

"Yes. There's some ... there's...."

"You are--or you were--courier pilot for the Cassa Expedition," Troy
said. He thumped his heel on the floor. "That's Cassa One, underneath
us. We've been away from Earth for three years and eight months." He
paused. "Does that help?"

Newland reflected, frowned. "Not much. I ... it seems to be true when
you say it." He hesitated. "We're prisoners, aren't we?"

"Uh-huh," he answered, flatly.

"I had that feeling. And you're hiding me here?"

"That's right," Troy agreed.

"Why?"

"Because nobody else knows you're still alive. It's better if they
don't, right now."

Newland shook his head, indicated a sign fastened to the ceiling above
the bunk in such a way that a man lying in the bunk on his back would
catch sight of it as soon as he opened his eyes. "That," he said, "made
sense as soon as I saw it just now! I remembered having read it before
and what it meant. But otherwise everything's still badly blurred."

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy glanced up at the sign. It read:

RELAX AND TAKE IT EASY, JERRY! YOU WERE IN A BAD SMASH-UP, AND YOU'VE
JUST FINISHED A LONG STRETCH IN THE EMERGENCY TANK OF YOUR SHIP.
EVERYTHING'S BOUND TO SEEM A LITTLE FOGGY, BUT YOU'RE GOING TO BE OKAY.
DON'T TRY TO LEAVE THE ROOM. IT HAS TO BE KEPT LOCKED, BUT SOMEONE WILL
BE ALONG TO SEE YOU IN TWO OR THREE HOURS AT THE MOST.

Troy said, "Your memory will start coming back fast enough. You've made
a good start." He sat down, took his cigarette case from his pocket.
"I'll go over some of the things that have happened with you. That
tends to bring them ... and other things ... back to mind. Care to
smoke?"

"Yes, I'd like to smoke."

Troy tossed the cigarette case over to the bunk, watched the pilot
reach for and miss it, then bend forward awkwardly to fumble for it on
the floor. Reflexes still very bad, he thought. But when Newland had
the case in his hand, he flicked it open without hesitation, took out
a cigarette and closed the case, then turned it over and pressed the
button which snapped on the concealed light. The day before, he had
stared at the case helplessly until Troy showed him what to do. So his
body had begun to recall more of its learned motion patterns.

Troy said, "I told you the main parts twice yesterday. Don't let that
worry you ... you've retained more than most would be likely to do
after a quarter of the time you spent in the tank. You weren't in very
good shape after the smash-up, Jerry!"

Newland said wryly, "I can imagine that." He drew on the cigarette,
coughed, then tossed the case back to Troy who caught it and put it in
his pocket.

"Have you got back any recollection at all of what the aliens that
caught us are like?" Troy asked.

Newland shook his head.

"Well," Troy said, "they're downright cute, in a way. More like big
penguins than anything else. Short little legs. The heads aren't so
cute ... a hammerhead shark would be the closest thing there, which is
why we call them Hammerheads--though not when we think some of them
might be listening.

"They don't belong here any more than we do. They came from another
system which is a lot closer than Sol but still a long way off. Now,
we aren't the first Earth people to get to Cassa. There was an Earth
survey ship poking around the system about twenty years ago, and it
seems that the Hammerheads also had an expedition here at the time.
They spotted our survey ship but weren't spotted themselves, and the
survey ship eventually went back to Earth short two of its men. Those
two were supposed to have got lost in the deserts on Cassa. Actually,
the Hammerheads picked them up ... Jerry?"

The pilot's head was beginning to nod. He straightened now and took a
puff on the cigarette, grinning embarrassedly. "S'all right, Troy!" he
muttered. "Seemed to get ... sort of absent-minded there for a moment."

Which was, Troy knew, one of the symptoms of the re-awakening period.
Newland's mind had been shut away from reality for a long time,
wrapped in soothing, vaguely pleasant dreams while the emergency tank
went about the business of repairing his broken body. The habit of
unconscious retreat from his surroundings could not be immediately
discarded, and particularly not when the surroundings were as
undesirable as those in which Newland now found himself. It would be
better, Troy thought, to skip some of the uglier details ... and yet
he had to tell the man enough to make him willing to cooperate in what
would be, at the very least, a desperately dangerous undertaking.

       *       *       *       *       *

He said, "You're still only three-quarters awake, Jerry. We have to
expect that. But the closer you listen and the more information you can
absorb, the faster you'll shake off the cobwebs. And that's important.
These Hammerheads are a tough breed, and we're in a bad spot."

Newland nodded. "I understand that much. Go ahead."

"Well," Troy said, "whatever that first Earth survey ship had to report
about the Cassa system looked good enough so that the administration
put Cassa down for a major expedition some day. Twenty years later, we
got here again--the interstellar exploration carrier _Atlas_ with eight
hundred men on board. I'm one of her engineers. And we found the
Tareegs--that's what the Hammerheads call themselves--waiting for us.
Not another bunch of scientists and assistants but a war-party. They'd
learned enough from the two survey ship men they'd caught to figure out
we'd be coming back and how to handle us when we got here.

"Now get straight on a few things about the Hammerheads, Jerry. Their
weapons systems are as good or better than ours. In other ways,
they're behind us. They've got a fair interstellar drive but can't make
the same use of it we do, because they've still a lot to learn about
inertial shielding. They have a couple of robot-directed interstellar
drones standing in a hangar a few hundred yards from here which can hit
half the speed of your courier, but no Hammerhead or human being could
ride 'em up and live. The two big carriers that brought them to Cassa
One are dead-slow boats compared to the _Atlas_. And that's about the
best they have at present.

"Just the same, they're out to get us. War is the best part of living
as far as they're concerned, and they're plenty good at it. So far
they've only been fighting among themselves but they're itching for a
chance at another race, and now we're it. Capturing an Earth expedition
in the Cassa System was only part of the plan to take Earth by
surprise."

Newland blinked, said slowly, "How's that? You'd think that might tip
their hand. We'll be missed, won't we?"

"Sure we'll be missed," Troy said. "But when? We were to stay here
eight years ... don't remember that either, eh? The Hammerheads will
have all the time they need to be set for whoever comes looking for us
eventually."

"But would they know that?"

Troy said bitterly, "They know everything about Earth that our top
brass scientists of the Cassa Expedition were able to tell them.
Pearson and Andrews--those names mean anything? They were the
Expedition Chiefs when we were captured. One of the first things the
Hammerheads did was to have the science staff and other department
heads look on while they tortured those two men to death. As a result,
they've had all the cooperation they could ask for--more than any
decent human being would think of giving them--from our present
leadership, the senior scientists Dr. Chris Dexter and Dr. Victor
Clingman. They're a couple of lousy traitors, Jerry, and I'm not sure
they're even capable of realizing it. Clingman's in charge here at the
ground base, and he acts as if he doesn't see anything wrong in helping
the Hammerheads."

"Helping the...." Vacancy showed for a moment in the pilot's
expression; he frowned uncertainly.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Try to stay awake, Jerry! There're just a few other things you should
try to get nailed down in your memory this time. The Hammerheads are
water animals. They can waddle around on land as long as they keep
themselves moist, but they don't like it. They've got a religion based
on a universal struggle between water and land. Cassa One's nothing but
hot desert and rock and big salt beds, so it's no good to them. And the
other two planets in the system have no oxygen to speak of.

"Now here's the thing that's hard to swallow. There's a huge lumped-up
asteroid swarm in the system. The _Atlas_ stopped for a few days on
the way in to look around in it. Dexter and Clingman, after we'd been
captured, volunteered the information to the Hammerheads that a lot of
that stuff was solid H_{2}O and that if they wanted Cassa One fixed up
the way they'd like it--wet--the _Atlas_ could ferry enough asteroid
ice over here in billion-ton loads to turn most of the surface of the
planet into a sea.

"You understand it wasn't the Hammerheads who had the idea. They don't
have anything resembling the ship power and equipment to handle such a
job; it hadn't even occurred to them that it could be possible. But you
can bet they bought it when it was handed to them. It will give them a
base a third of the way between their own system and Sol. That's what's
been going on since we landed and were grabbed off ... almost three
years ago now.

"And these last weeks there've been, for the first time since we got
here, a few clouds in the sky. It means the boys on the _Atlas_ have
as many of those mountains of ice riding on orbit as are needed, and
they've started shoving them down into the atmosphere to break up and
melt. So we ... Jerry, wake up!"

Troy Gordon paused, watching Newland, then shrugged, stood up and
went over to take the butt of the cigarette from the pilot's slack
fingers. Newland had slid back into catatonic immobility; he offered no
resistance as Troy swung his legs up on the bunk and straightened him
out on his back.

How much would he remember the next time he awoke? Troy didn't know; he
had no medical experience and was working on the basis of remembered
scraps of information about the treatment given men recovering from an
experience such as Newland's. There were people on the ground station
who could have told him what to do, but he hadn't dared ask questions.

It was chiefly a matter of time now. Or of lack of time. What would
happen when the giant hauling operation was concluded, when the water
which had been carried in from space came creeping across the vast
desert plateaus about the station, was something he didn't know. But
it was almost certain that if his own plans hadn't been carried out by
that time, they never would be.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Jerry," he addressed the sleeping pilot softly, "if you've wondered
why I'm risking my neck to bring you back to life and keep you hidden
away from the Hammerheads and Clingman, it's because you're the one
man I still can trust in this lousy expeditionary group. It's because
you tried to do something about the situation on your own. You don't
remember it yet, but when the Hammerheads took over the _Atlas_ you
made a break for it in the courier boat. You tried to get away and warn
Earth. They shot you down before you could clear atmosphere; but then
they couldn't find the wreck. They thought it was down in one of the
salt beds and gave up looking for it.

"But I found it in the desert a couple of months later. You'd dropped
through into the emergency tank and you were still more or less alive.
I smuggled the tank into the station here as soon as I'd rigged up a
place where I could keep it. I can use some help, and you'll be the
best possible man for the job...."

He stopped, surprised to see that Newland's mouth had begun to work
awkwardly as if he were trying to speak. Then a few words came, slow
and slurred, but indicating that the pilot's mind had not sunk nearly
as far from full wakefulness as during his previous relapses.

"Wha ... want me ... do?"

Troy didn't answer. Not yet, he thought. Not until Newland was no
longer helpless. Because, in spite of all precautions, he might be
discovered here at any hour; and if that should happen, Troy's secret
must still be his own. He could act without Newland's help if necessary.

He waited a few seconds longer, while the pilot's face slowly smoothed
out again into comatose blankness. Then Troy turned around quietly and
left the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy Gordon's personal living quarters were on the lowest of the
station's three underground levels, behind the central power plant and
utilities section. Considerable privacy was their only attraction; and
since the arrangement kept Troy, during his off-duty hours, close to
his responsibilities as the station's maintenance engineer, neither Dr.
Clingman nor the Hammerheads had objected to it. He was a useful man;
and to the useful, minor privileges could be extended.

Troy had been able to take advantage of that circumstance. The room
in which Newland was hidden lay behind his own quarters, forming an
extension to them. The entrance to it was concealed, and while a
careful search should have disclosed it, Troy--so far as he knew--had
as yet given no one a reason to initiate such a search. The back room
was not part of the station's original design; he had cut it secretly
out of the rock. With the equipment at his disposal, it had been a
relatively minor job.

But it involved a very ugly risk. Discovery would have meant death, and
no easy one. With the exception of the cooperating chief scientists,
the Hammerheads' attitude towards their captives was largely one of
watchful indifference, so long as no one got out of line. But they
had taken one measure which insured that, after a short time, there
was very little inclination left among the prisoners to get out of
line knowingly. At intervals of about a month, whether or not an overt
offense had been committed, one more member of Earth's Cassa Expedition
was methodically tortured to death by the aliens; and a group of his
fellows, selected apparently at random, was obliged to witness the
matter while fastened to a device which allowed them to experience the
victim's sensations in modified form.

Troy had been included twice in the observing group. He hadn't known
whether it implied a personal warning or not. In the Hammerheads' eyes,
he was a useful servant; it might be that he was also a suspected
one. Nevertheless, it had been necessary to construct the back room.
One day, he was returning through the desert from one of the outlying
automatic stations under his care when he caught the momentary whisper
of a distress signal in his groundcar's receiver. The slight sound had
put his hair on end. It was an Earth signal, on an Earth band; and
with the _Atlas_ off-planet it could have only one possible source. In
seconds, it wavered out and was lost, but Troy already had established
the direction.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week passed before he had the opportunity to obtain a second fix;
then, hours later, he was standing beside the wreck of the courier
ship. It had plunged into a deep cleft in the rocks and was now half
covered by sand; it began to seem less of a miracle that the Hammerhead
fliers had not found it. Troy shut off the quavering signal projector,
discovered next that the emergency tank had a living occupant, but
left Newland where he was while he hurriedly examined the rest of the
ship. The courier was hopelessly damaged, but before Troy concluded
the examination, his plan against the Hammerheads had been born, at
least as a possibility. It took more than two and a half years then to
convert the possibility into an operation which seemed at last to have
something better than a fighting chance to succeed. For, of course,
Troy had told no one of the discovery. A few words might have gained
him eager helpers, but might also have reached a man paralyzed by
the fear of torture to the extent that he would reveal everything to
safeguard himself.

Troy left his rooms, locking the outer door behind him. Moving thirty
feet down the narrow steel-floored passage behind the power plant,
he entered one of the tool rooms, again closing and locking the door
as he went through. It had been a much more difficult and lengthy
undertaking to drill a tunnel from the station's lowest level up to the
force-screened Hammerhead hangar outside than to carve an additional
room out of the rock, but it had been completed months before. The
tunnel's hidden station entrance was beneath the tool room floor, the
other opening out of the polished rock base of the hangar twenty feet
from one of the interstellar drones. The most careful human scrutiny
would hardly have read any significance there into the hairline crack
which formed an irregular oval on the rock; and since Troy hadn't been
found out, he could assume that the Hammerheads' powers of observation
were no more acute.

It had been night in the surrounding desert for some hours by now,
but the hangar was brightly lit--a very unusual occurrence at such a
time. Troy paused, momentarily disconcerted, studying the scene in the
hangar through the vision screen installed in the tunnel just below the
exit. If the Hammerheads--there were only Hammerheads--present--were
initiating some major new activity in the next day or two, his plans
might be, if not ruined, at least very dangerously delayed. He counted
over a hundred of the creatures, mostly assembled near the far end of
the hangar in three orderly groups. A few officers stood together,
somewhat closer to him.

Troy chewed his lip anxiously, the moisture-conserving suits they wore
for outside duty on Cassa One, which concealed the two sets of swim
flippers along their sides and left the top pair of upper limbs ...
short, sturdy brown arms with hands larger than human hands, quite
as capable and rather unpleasantly human in appearance ... free for
use. The transparent, inverted-triangle helmets were clamped down. As
he looked on, one of their big atmospheric personnel carriers came
gliding into sight behind the immobile ranks. There were commands, and
the Tareegs turned and filed into the vehicle, moving with the rapid,
awkward little waddle which was their method of progress on land. A
minute or two later, the loaded carrier moved out of the hangar, and
the lights in the vast structure slowly faded away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where were they going? They were carrying the usual weapons, but this
was not some dryland drill. Troy could not remember seeing so large a
group leave the station before. The uneasy conviction returned that
the move must be connected with the fact that clouds had begun to show
in Cassa One's skies, that the mile-thick boulders of ice which had
been brought across space already were falling through the atmosphere
of the desiccated world.

One or two more undisturbed days, Troy thought. In that time it would
become clear whether Newland was going to recover sufficiently to be
able to play a part in his plans. Only two sections of the shattered
courier ship, the inertial shielding and the autonav, had been needed
to transform the Hammerheads' interstellar drone twenty feet from the
tunnel exit into a spaceship which men could ride and direct. Both
those sections had been repairable, and everything else Troy had been
able to steal or build in the station. Month after month passed as
he brought it all together in the tunnel, familiarized himself with
every necessary detail of the drones' mechanisms and fitted in the
new installations ... first in theory, then in actual fact. A part
of almost every night was spent in the darkened hangar, assembling,
checking and testing one section or another, then disassembling
everything and taking it back down into the tunnel before the moment
came when the Tareeg watch-beams would sweep again through the hangar.

The beam-search was repeated each three hours and twenty-seven minutes
throughout the night. Within that period of time, Troy would have to
carry out a final complete assembly, let the drone roar into life and
send it flashing up through the force-screen and into space.

By now, he knew he could do it. And if he had calculated the drone's
capacity correctly, he would then be less than six months from Earth.
The Hammerheads had nothing they could send after him.

But once in space, he needed Newland's experience. Everything else
would be on board to get them to Earth, but without a trained pilot the
probability of arriving only on autonav was something Troy couldn't
calculate. With a great deal of luck, he thought, it still should
be possible. Newland's skills, on the other hand, would give them
something considerably better than an even chance.

But Newland would have to be recovered first. He was still under the
ministrations of the emergency tank, embedded now in the wall of the
back room beyond the bunk. The tank had to stay there; no amount of
planning had shown a way it could be fitted into the drone besides
everything else; there simply was no room left for it. And what Troy
had learned made it clear that if he lifted into space with Newland
before the pilot's behavior was very nearly normal, he would have a
half-dead zombie on his hands before the trip was well begun.

That had been his reason for waiting. But the question was now whether
he mightn't already have waited a little too long....

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy checked his watch. Take a chance and begin the final installation
at once? It would be an hour before the search-beams came back. The
interior of the ships was inspected at irregular periods; he hadn't
been able to establish any pattern for that. But to leave his equipment
in place in the drone for one day, or two at the most, might not be
stretching his luck too far. Then, if Newland shaped up, there would be
that much less delay in leaving, that much less time to spend in the
Tareeg hangar finishing the job at the end. And no one could tell what
new developments the next few days might bring, or how much time they
would find that they had left....

He twisted the direction dials on the vision screen, swinging it slowly
once more about the darkened hangar. Then he unlocked and shifted the
exit switch, and the irregularly carved section of rock above him moved
on its lifting rods out of the hangar floor. Troy swung up and out
behind it, got to his feet and started over to the drone.

There was a thin, burring noise close to his ear.

Troy stopped in mid-stride, his face tight and wary. The noise meant
that his room communicator was being called. Probably some minor
technical emergency on the station, but.... He counted off twenty
seconds, then turned on the relay mike under his coat collar. Trying to
make his voice thick with drowsiness, he said, "Gordon speaking. Who's
it?"

"Reese," a carefully uninflected voice told him from the speaker. "Dr.
Clingman wants you to come up to his office immediately, Gordon."

Troy felt a sudden sharp prickling of fear.

"At this time of night?" he demanded petulantly. "It's the middle of my
sleep period! What's gone wrong now?"

"I wouldn't know," Reese said. "Our senior scientist"--he made the two
words sound like a worn, habitual curse--"didn't go into details."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Victor Clingman was a large, untidy man inclined to plumpness,
with stringy blond hair and protuberant pale eyes. His office adjoined
that of the Tareeg station commandant--a Low Dsala, in Hammerhead
terms--and it was permeated from there with a slightly salty, vaguely
perfumed moistness. Rank had its privileges; only the Low Dsala enjoyed
the luxury of keeping his station work quarters damp enough to make
the wearing of a suit unnecessary. The other Hammerheads waddled about
the cold, dry halls completely covered, breathing through humidifiers,
and were only occasionally permitted, and then after much ceremony, to
enter an area in their section called the Water Room and linger there
for several hours.

Troy came into Clingman's office with his tool kit through the double
doors designed to prevent moisture from escaping, shivering slightly as
the sudden clamminess touched his skin. Clingman, engaged as usual in
pecking out something on a writer, shirt sleeves rolled up on his plump
arms, ranked piles of notes on the table beside him, turned a pale,
unhealthy-looking face towards the door.

"Mister Gordon," he said mildly, dragging the "mister" out a little as
was his habit. He nodded at the wall to Troy's left. "Our recording
mechanisms became inoperative again ... and just as I was in the
process of noting down some very interesting fresh clues as to the
probable origin of the Tareeg coup system. Will you try to attend to
it?"

"Right away," Troy said, his vague fears dispelled. Clingman's
recorders were a standard problem; the repair parts for such items were
on the _Atlas_ which had not come down into atmosphere for almost a
year. There probably had been no reason to feel apprehensive about a
night call to the office. It had happened on such occasions before.

       *       *       *       *       *

He went to work, glancing over from time to time at the senior
scientist who was frowning down pensively at the writer. Before the
Hammerheads executed his predecessors, Dr. Victor Clingman had been
head of the Biology Department on the Cassa Expedition, and his
interest in the subject had not changed, though it was now centered
exclusively on the life habits of their captors. The Tareegs did not
seem to object to his preoccupation with them. Possibly it amused them;
though Clingman had told Troy once, rather complacently, that his
research already had proved to be of some usefulness to the Tareegs in
answering certain questions they had had about themselves. That might
also be true. On several occasions, at any rate, Troy had found either
the Low Dsala or another Hammerhead officer in Clingman's office,
answering the scientist's questions in high-pitched, reedy voices
which always had the suggestion of a whistle in them. All of them
apparently had been taught human speech, though they rarely chose to
use it.

Clingman cleared his throat, asked without turning his head, "Did
I tell you, Gordon, that the Tareegs' known history goes back to
considerably less than a thousand years, by human time reckoning?"

"Yes, you did, doctor," Troy said. It had become almost impossible for
him to do work for Clingman--and Clingman invariably called on him
personally when he had some mechanical chore on hand--without listening
to a lengthy, rambling discourse on the scientist's latest discoveries
about the Tareegs. It was an indication, he thought, that Clingman had
grown increasingly hungry for human companionship of any kind. He could
hardly fail to know that the majority of the station's human component
was aware he had originated the suggestion made by the leading
scientific group to the Hammerheads concerning the possibility of
turning Cassa One into a Tareeg water world, and that he was generally
despised for it. Troy's noncommittal attitude might have led him to
believe that Troy either had not been informed of the fact or happened
to be a man who saw nothing very objectionable in such an act.

Troy was, as it happened, less certain than some of the others that
Clingman and the men like Dr. Chris Dexter, who had been directing
the ice-hauling operations of the _Atlas_, had come to a deliberate,
cold-blooded agreement among themselves to save their own skins by
offering to help the Hammerheads against mankind. It was perhaps more
likely that they had acted in unthinking panic, following the gruesome
executions the Hammerheads had forced them to witness. That would be
more forgivable, if only slightly so. It was difficult to be sure about
Clingman in any way. He might be unpardonably guilty in his own mind
and still no less frightened than before--for who knew, after all, what
the Tareegs ultimately intended with their prisoners? On the other
hand, he might actually have buried all such considerations beneath the
absorbed, objective interest he appeared to take in them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy had paid no more attention than he could help at first to
Clingman's scholarly monologues on his favorite theme. His own thoughts
avoided the Hammerheads as far as possible. But as his personal plans
began to develop and the chance that he might reach Earth grew into
something more than a wildly improbable hope, he realized that the
more he learned about the new enemy, the more valuable an eventual
report would be. Thereafter he listened carefully, memorizing all
of Clingman's speculations, and gradually developed some degree of
detached interest of his own in the creatures. They had a curious
history, short though it was, a history of merciless strife on twin
water worlds of the same system in which any records of a common
background had been long lost or destroyed. Then had come the shock of
mutual discovery and renewed battling, now on an interplanetary scale,
which ended in a truce of carefully guarded equality between the rival
worlds.

"That situation, it seems possible," Clingman had said once, "may
have led to the legend of the lost home-world of the Tareegs." It was
a cautious reference to the obvious fact that neither Tareeg planet
would have been willing to admit that it might be no more than an
ancient colony of its twin. A remote and glorious ancestral world which
had brought both colonies forth as equals was a much more acceptable
theory. "And yet," Clingman went on, "the legend might well be based in
fact. And it may be that we, with our skills, will enable the Tareegs
to rediscover that world...."

It sounded, Troy had thought, with something like amused disgust, as if
the scientific brass had prudently worked out a new scheme to preserve
itself after the Cassa One operation closed out.

"There also, of course," Clingman continued, blinking his pale eyes
reflectively at Troy, "we have the origin of the parallel legend of
the Terrible Enemy. What except the conquest of the home-world by a
monstrous foe could have caused it to forget its colonies? In that
light, it becomes a little easier to understand the ... ah, well ...
the ... cautious distrust the Tareegs have shown towards the first
intelligent species they encountered in interstellar space."

And _that_ sounded like an attempted apology--not so much for the
Tareegs and their manner of expressing cautious distrust as for Dr.
Victor Clingman's collaboration with them. But Troy said nothing. By
then he was very eager to hear more.

He did. Almost week by week, something new was added to the Hammerhead
data filed away in his mind. Much of it might be unimportant detail,
but Earth's strategists could decide that for themselves. The Tareeg
coup system Clingman was mulling over again tonight had been of
significance at least to the prisoners; for it probably was the reason
the majority of them were still alive. The two High Dsalas who, each
representing one of the twin worlds, were in joint command of the
Tareeg forces here would have gained great honor merely by returning to
their system at once with the captured Earth expedition. But to have
stayed instead, silently to have assumed personal responsibility for
the creation of a new world fit for Tareeg use--_that_ assured them
honor and power beyond belief when the giant task was over and the
announcement went out....

       *       *       *       *       *

The awareness that Clingman was speaking again broke into Troy's
thoughts.

"Almost everything they do," the scientist observed musingly, "is
filled with profound ceremonial meaning. It was a long while before we
really understood that. You've heard, I suppose, that cloud formations
have appeared on this side of the planet?"

Troy was about to answer, then checked himself, frowning down at the
cleanly severed end of the lead he had been tracing. Severed? What....

"Gordon?"

"Uh ... why, yes, I've seen them myself, doctor." Troy's mind began to
race. The lead had been deliberately cut, no question of that. But why?
He might have spent another hour checking over the recording equipment
before discovering it--

"It means, of course," he heard Clingman saying, "that the dry sea
basins of Cassa One gradually are filling with water. Now, we know the
vital importance to the Tareegs of being able to immerse themselves in
the--to them--sacred fluid, and how severely they have been rationed in
that respect here. One might have thought that, from the High Dsalas
down, all of them would have plunged eagerly into the first bodies of
water to appear on the planet. But, no ... so great a thing must not be
approached in that manner! A day was set, months in advance, when it
could be calculated that the water level would reach a certain point.
At that hour, every Tareeg who can be spared from essential duty will
be standing at the shore of the new sea. And together...."

Abruptly, the meaning of Clingman's words faded out of Troy's mind.

The sudden nighttime summons to Clingman's office--had it been no
accident after all? Had he done something in the past few hours to
arouse suspicion, and was he being detained here now while his rooms
were searched? Troy felt sweat start out on his face. Should he say
anything? He hesitated, then reached quietly into the tool kit.

"... and only then"--Clingman's voice returned suddenly to his
consciousness--"will the word be prepared to go back, and the messenger
ships filled with the sacred water so that it can be blended at the
same moment with the twin worlds' oceans, to show that Cassa One has
become jointly a part of each...."

Messenger ships--the interstellar drones, of course. And the big troop
of Hammerheads which had been taken from the station in the personnel
carrier less than an hour ago.... His hands trembling a little, Troy
quickly closed the recorder, picked up the tool kit.

Clingman checked himself. "Oh ... you've finished, Gordon?" He sounded
startled.

Troy managed to work a grin on his face. "Yes, doctor. Just a broken
lead. And now, if you'll excuse me...." He started to turn away.

"Ah, one moment!" Clingman said sharply. "There was ... I ... now
where...." He gazed about the table, pushing fretfully at the piles
of notes. "Oh, yes! Dr. Rojas ... Room 72. You were on your way up
here when he attempted to reach you. Something that needed ... well, I
forget now what he said. Would you mind going over there immediately?"

"Not at all." Troy's heart was pounding. If there had been any doubt
he was being deliberately delayed, it would have vanished now. Dr.
Rojas, of course, _would_ have something waiting that "needed" Troy's
attention before he got to Room 72. A call from Clingman would arrange
for it.

But if they were suspicious of him, why hadn't he been placed under
arrest? They don't want to scare me off, Troy thought. They're not
sure, and if I'm up to something they don't want to scare me off before
they know just what it is....

       *       *       *       *       *

He'd swung around to the hall, mind reaching ahead through the next
few minutes, outlining quickly the immediate steps he would have to
take--and so he was almost past the Hammerhead before he saw it. The
door to the Low Dsala's offices had opened quietly, and the Low Dsala
stood there five feet away, the horizontally stalked eyes fixed on Troy.

Troy started involuntarily. He might be very close to death now. To
approach a Hammerhead ... let alone the station's ranking officer ...
unbidden within a dozen steps was a dangerous thing for a prisoner to
do. The Dsala's left hand hung beside the ornament-encrusted bolt-gun
all the officers carried--and those broad torturers' hands could move
with flashing speed. But the creature remained immobile. Troy averted
his eyes from it, keeping his face expressionless, walked on with
carefully unhurried steps, conscious of the Dsala's stare following him.

It was one of the comparatively few times he had seen a Hammerhead
without its suit. If one knew nothing about them, they would have
looked almost comical--there was a decided resemblance to the penguins,
the clown-birds of Earth, in the rotund, muscular bodies and the double
set of swimming flippers. The odd head with its thick protruding
eyelobes and the small, constantly moving crimson triangle of the
mouth were less funny, as were the dark, human-shaped hands. Troy felt
a chill on his back when he heard the Dsala break into sudden speech
behind him: a high, quick gabble in its own language. Was it expressing
anger? Drawing the door quietly shut, he heard Clingman begin to reply
in the same tongue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reese looked briefly up from the intercom desk as Troy stopped before
it. "Finished with Clingman?" he asked.

"Uh-huh," Troy said. "Any other little jobs waiting before I can get
back to sleep?"

"Not so far," Reese told him sourly. "Pleasant dreams." He returned his
attention to the panels before him.

So Dr. Rojas, as had seemed almost certain, had put in no call for him.
But if he didn't show up at Room 72, how long before they began to
wonder where he was? Perhaps four or five minutes....

Troy stepped out of the elevator on the maintenance level forty
seconds after leaving Reese, went quickly on into the engine room.
One Hammerhead guard stood watching him from the far end. As a rule,
three of them were stationed here. They were accustomed to Troy's
appearances, and he had been careful to establish as irregular a
pattern as was practicable in attending to routine chores, so that in
an emergency his motions would draw a minimum of attention. Ignoring
the guard now, he carried out a desultory inspection of a set of wall
controls, paused four times to remove four minor sections of machinery
and drop them into his tool kit, and was leaving the big room again a
minute and a half later.

Out in the passage, he re-opened the kit, quickly snapped three of the
small steel parts together. The carrying of firearms naturally was
not a privilege the Tareegs extended to human beings; but the newly
assembled device was a quite functional gun. Troy thumbed three dozen
hand-made shells out of the fourth piece removed from the control
equipment, loaded the gun and shoved it into his pocket.

The door to his quarters was locked, and there were no immediate
signs inside that an inspection might have been carried out during
his absence. Troy moved over to the rarely used intercom view-screen,
changed some settings behind it, and switched it on. The hidden back
room appeared in the screen, and--in spite of his near-certainty about
Clingman's purpose in detaining him--Troy felt his face whiten slowly
with shock.

Jerry Newland was no longer lying on his bunk, was nowhere in the room.
A gaping opening in the wall behind the bunk showed where the emergency
tank Troy had brought in from the crashed courier ship had been
installed. So they not only had the pilot in their hands--they already
were aware of his identity and of the condition he was in.

Troy felt a surge of physical sickness. Left to himself, Newland would
have died in the desert without regaining consciousness as the tank's
independent power source began to fail. Troy had saved him from that;
but very probably it was the Tareeg death the pilot faced now. Troy
switched off the screen, started back to the door, fighting down his
nausea. Self-blame was a luxury for which he had no time. He couldn't
help Newland, and there was not an instant to lose. Within a few
hours, he could still be in space and take his chances alone at getting
the warning to Earth.

But first the search for him must be directed away from the Tareeg
hangar. And that, very fortunately, was an action for which he had long
been thoroughly prepared....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hammerhead guard at the station's ground-level exit also had been
reduced to one soldier. And here the appearance of the maintenance
engineer's groundcar on its way to one of the automatic installations
out in the desert was as familiar an occurrence as Troy's irregular
inspection visits in the engine room. The guard watched him roll past
without moving and without indication of interest. Troy glanced at his
watch as the exit closed behind him. Not quite six minutes since he'd
left Clingman's office ... they should already have begun to check on
his whereabouts, and the fact that he alone of all the humans at the
station had access to a groundcar would then be one of the first things
to come to their minds.

He slowed the car near a tiny inspection door in the outer wall of the
station, cut its lights, jumped out and watched it roll on, picking
up speed as it swerved away to the east and rushed down into the
dark desert. Months before he had installed the automatic guidance
devices which would keep the car hurrying steadily eastwards now,
changing direction only to avoid impassable obstacles. It might be
that, at a time of such importance to the Tareegs, they would not
attempt to follow the car. If a flier did discover it from the air,
the vehicle would be destroyed ... and it was rigged to disintegrate
with sufficient violence then to conceal the fact that it had lacked a
driver.

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy opened the inspection door, then stopped for a moment, staring
back at the Tareeg hangar beyond the station. Light had been glowing
through its screens again when he came out; now the hazy translucence
of the screens was drawing sideways and up from the great entrance
rectangle. Another of the big personnel carriers nosed slowly out,
moved up into the air and vanished against the night sky. If it was
loaded as close to capacity as the one he had watched from inside the
tunnel, almost two thirds of the Hammerhead force at the station had
gone by now to attend the rites at Cassa One's new sea.

He waited while the force-screen restored itself over the entrance.
Immediately afterwards, the lights in the hangar turned dim and faded
away. Troy climbed in through the inspection door, locked it and
started back down to the maintenance level.

With a little luck, he thought, he might even be able to work
undisturbed now inside the interstellar drone he had selected for his
escape. He would have to be back in the tunnel when the search-beams
came through again ... he suspected they might be quite sensitive
enough to detect the presence of a living being inside one of the
ships. But the Hammerheads themselves might not show up again until
he was prepared to leave. And then it wouldn't matter. If they did
appear--well, he would get some warning from the fact that the hangar
lights would begin to come on first. Not very much warning, but it
might be enough.

The passage leading past his quarters was empty and quiet. Troy
remained behind a corner for a minute or two listening. If Dr. Rojas
had reported his failure to arrive at Room 72, the Tareegs must also
have learned by now that he had left the station, and the last place
they would think of hunting for him was here. But somebody--Hammerhead
or human stooge--might be in his rooms, making a second and more
thorough investigation there.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everything remained still. Troy came quietly out into the passage, went
down it to the tool room next to his quarters, opened the door, taking
the gun from his pocket, and slipped inside. With the door locked, he
stood still a moment, then turned on the lights.

A glance around showed that nobody was lurking for him here. He
darkened the room again, crossed it, removed the floor section over the
tunnel entrance and slipped down into the tunnel. Working by touch,
he pulled the floor section back across the opening, snapped it into
place and started up the familiar narrow passage he had cut through the
desert rock.

He couldn't have said exactly what warned him. It might have been the
tiny click of a black-light beam going on. But he knew suddenly that
something alive and breathing stood farther up the passage waiting for
him, and the gun came quickly from his pocket again.

His forehead was struck with almost paralyzing force. Stungun ... they
wanted him alive. Troy found himself on his knees, dizzy and sick,
while a voice yelled at him. _Human_, he thought, with a blaze of
hatred beyond anything he'd ever felt for the Tareegs. _Traitor human!_
The gun, still somehow in his hand, snarled its answer.

Then the stungun found him again, in three quick, hammering blows, and
consciousness was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

There came presently an extended period of foggy, groping thoughts
interspersed with sleep and vivid nightmares. After a time, Troy was
aware that he was in a section of the sick bay on the _Atlas_, and that
the great carrier was in interstellar flight. So the operation on Cassa
One was over.

He wondered how long he had been knocked out. Days perhaps. It was the
shrill, rapid-fire voice of a Tareeg which had first jolted him back
into partial awareness. For confused seconds, Troy thought the creature
was addressing him; then came the click of a speaker and the sounds
ended, and he realized he had heard the Tareeg's voice over the ship's
intercom system. A little later, it occurred to him that it had been
using its own language and therefore could not have been speaking to
him.

During that first muddled period, Troy knew now and then that he was
still almost completely paralyzed. Gradually, very gradually, his mind
began to clear and the intervals of sleep which always ended with
terrifying nightmares grew shorter. Simultaneously he found he was
acquiring a limited ability to move. And that, too, increased.

It might have been three or four hours after his first awakening
before he began to plan what he might do. He had made a number of
observations. There were three other men in this section with him. All
seemed to be unconscious. He thought the one lying in the bed next to
his own was Newland, but the room was dim and he had been careful to
avoid motions which might have been observed, so he wasn't certain.
There was a single human attendant in the small room beyond the open
doorspace opposite his bed. Troy didn't recall the man's face. He was
in the uniform of a medical corpsman; but whatever else the fellow
might be, he was here primarily in the role of a guard because he had
a gun fastened to his belt. It classed him as a human being whose
subservience to the Hammerheads was not in question. Twice, when the
man in the bed at the far end of the room had begun to groan and move
about, the guard came in and did something that left the restless one
quiet again. Troy couldn't see what he used, but the probability was
that it had been a drug administered with a hypodermic spray.

Getting his hands on the gun, Troy decided, shouldn't be too difficult
if he made no mistakes. His life was forfeit, and to lie and wait
until the Tareeg inquisitors were ready for him wasn't to his taste.
Neither ... though somewhat preferable ... was personal suicide. A
ship, even as great a ship as the _Atlas_, had certain vulnerabilities
in interstellar flight--and who knew them better than one of the ship's
own engineers? The prime nerve centers were the bridge and the sections
immediately surrounding it. It might be, Troy thought, it just might
be that the Hammerheads never would bring their prize in to the twin
worlds to have its treasures of technological information pried out of
it. And that in itself would be a major gain for Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned various possibilities over in his mind with the detachment of
a man who has acknowledged the inevitable fact of his own death. And he
felt his strength flowing back into him.

The guard in the other room presently heard renewed groans and the
slurred muttering of a half-conscious man. As he came in through the
doorspace with the drug spray he walked into Troy's fist. It didn't
quite put him to sleep, but the spray did thirty seconds later, and
shortly he was resting, carefully bound and gagged since Troy didn't
know how long the drug would retain its effect, in the back of a large
clothes locker.

The man in the next bed was Newland. He seemed uninjured but was
unconscious, presumably drugged like the other two. Troy left the
section in the corpsman's uniform, the gun concealed in his pocket. It
was improbable that the guard's authority to carry it extended beyond
the sick bay area. In another pocket--it might come in handy--was the
refilled drug spray.

He was two decks closer to the bridge section when it struck him how
deserted the _Atlas_ seemed. Of course, he had avoided areas where he
would be likely to run into sizable groups of either men or Tareegs.
But he had seen only six humans so far, only two of the Hammerheads.
These last had come out of a cross-passage ahead of him and vanished
into another, two men following quietly behind, the high-pitched alien
voices continuing to make a thin, complaining clamor in the otherwise
empty hall seconds after they had disappeared. And the thought came to
Troy: suppose most of the ship's complement was down in the sleepers?

It wasn't impossible. The _Atlas_ must still be provisioned for years
to come, but an excellent way to avoid human mutiny on the approach
to the Hammerhead worlds would be to put any captives not needed for
essential duty to sleep. And the _Atlas_ hadn't been built for the
convenience of water-creatures. To control a human skeleton crew would
require a correspondingly small number of Tareegs. Most of their force,
he thought, very well might be making the return in their own vessels.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reflection literally stopped Troy in his tracks. Because that could
change everything he'd had in mind, opened up possibilities he hadn't
thought existed ... including the one, still remote though it might be,
of returning the _Atlas_ to Earth. Perhaps the men now in charge of
the ship would be almost as unwilling to allow that to happen as the
Hammerheads; they had too much to answer for. But if the situation he
had imagined did exist, his thoughts raced on ... why then....

Troy's mind swam briefly with a wild premonition of triumph. There
_were_ ways in which it might be done! But because of that, there was
also now the sudden need for much more caution than he had intended to
use. What he needed first was somebody who could tell him exactly how
things stood on board--preferably somebody in a position of authority
who could be persuaded or forced to fall in then with Troy's subsequent
moves.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bridge deck was as quiet as the others. On the old _Atlas_, most
of this area had been officers' country, reserved for the expedition
heads and top ship personnel; and presumably that arrangement had been
changed only by the addition of Tareeg commanders and guards. Troy kept
to the maintenance passages, encountered no one but presently found
unused crew quarters and exchanged the corpsman uniform there for less
conspicuous shipboard clothes. This would make a satisfactory temporary
base of operations. And now to get the information he wanted....

The voice was coming out of the only door open on the dim hall. There
were six staterooms on either side, and Troy remembered that the room
beyond the open door had been occupied by Dr. Clingman on the trip
out from Earth. The voice--preoccupied, mild, a little tired--was
unmistakably Dr. Victor Clingman's.

Was he alone? Troy thought so. He couldn't make out the words, but
it was a monologue, not a conversation. He had the impression of
Clingman dictating another rambling dissertation on Tareeg ways into
a recorder; and the conviction came to him, not for the first time,
that the man was in some essential manner no longer sane, that he had
come to believe that his observations on these deadly enemies some day
really could be compiled into an orderly and valuable addition to human
knowledge.

Sane or not, he was a frightened man, the perfect quarry for Troy's
present purpose. With a gun on him, he would talk. And once having
assisted Troy to any degree, he would be too terrified of Tareeg
reprisals to do anything but switch sides again and go along with Troy,
hoping that thereby the worst--once more--could be avoided. The worst
for Victor Clingman. It would be impossible, Troy thought, to trust
Clingman, but he could make very good use of him in spite of that.

He came quietly along the passage, his attention as much on the
closed doors about him as on the one which was open. The guard's gun
unfortunately wasn't a noiseless type, but he had wrapped a small
cushion around its muzzle and across it, which should muffle reports
satisfactorily if it came to that. Words became distinguishable.

"It is not a parasite in the ordinary sense," Clingman's tired voice
said. "It is a weapon. It kills and moves on. A biological weapon
limited to attack one species: the enemy. It is insidious. There is no
warning and no defense. Unconsciousness and death occur painlessly
within an hour after contact, and the victim has not realized he is
being destroyed. The radius of infection moves out indetectably and
with incredible swiftness. And yet there was a method of containing
this agent. That knowledge, however, is now lost.

"As an achievement of the Tareeg genius for warfare, the weapon seems
matched--in some respects surpassed--only by the one used to counteract
it. And in that, obviously, there were serious faults. They...."

The man, Troy decided, was quite close, perhaps twelve feet to the
right side of the door. He glanced back along the silent hall, slipped
the cover from the gun--with Clingman, he would only need to show
it--then came into the room in two quick strides, turning to the right
and drawing the door shut behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no one in sight. The voice continued:

"... desperate, with no time to complete essential testing. A terrible
gamble, but one which inevitably...." The meaning faded from Troy's
mind as he discovered the wall-speaker from which the words were
coming. His eyes darted across the room to a comfortable chair drawn
up beside a table, to a familiar picture of untidily arrayed piles of
notes on the table, a thread of smoke still rising from a cigarette
in the tray among them. Clingman had been in the room within minutes,
listening to one of his previous recordings as he worked. Troy's glance
shifted to a closed door on his right. Bedroom and bath of the suite
lay behind it. Clingman might be there. He might also ... Troy reached
back, quietly opened the door to the hall again, moved on and slipped
out of sight behind an ornamental screen on the other side of the
speaker.

Clingman could have left his quarters for some reason. In any event, it
was obvious that he had intended to return to the room very shortly. If
he brought someone with him, the situation might be more difficult. But
hardly too difficult to be handled.

Troy worked the improvised silencer back over the gun muzzle, senses
straining to catch either the opening of the door on his right or the
sound of an approach down the hall.

"So it was possible," he heard the wall-speaker say, "to reconstruct,
in almost every essential detail, what the concluding situation must
have been on the world where the Tareeg species had its origin. The
attacking section was safely screened, presumably by a form of energy
barrier, against the deadly agent it had released. The section under
attack had no defense against an agent so nearly indestructible that it
subsequently survived for over a thousand years in its inert, frozen
condition without losing effectiveness in the least--"

Troy thought: What ... WHAT HAD IT SAID?

He stepped out from behind the screen as the door on his right opened.
Dr. Clingman stood in the door, mouth open, eyes bulging in surprise
and alarm at the gun in Troy's hand. Then his gaze shifted to Troy's
face, and his expression slowly changed.

"Mister Gordon," he murmured, smiling very cautiously, "you are really
the most difficult man to keep stopped!"

Troy pointed a shaking finger at the speaker. "That!" he cried.
"That ... it said _a thousand years in the ice_!"

Clingman nodded. "Yes." His eyes returned, still rather warily, to
the gun. "And I'm rather glad, you know, you happened to catch that
particular part before I appeared."

Troy was staring at him. "That was their lost home-world--the one
you've kept talking about. That great asteroid cloud here...."

"No, not here." Clingman came forward more confidently into the room,
and Troy saw now that the left side of the scientist's face and head
was covered with medical plastic. "The Cassa system is a long way
behind us, Gordon," Clingman said. "We've been on our way back to Earth
for more than two days."

"To Earth," Troy muttered. "And I...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Clingman jabbed a stubby finger down on a control switch at the table,
and the wall-speaker went silent. "It will be easier to tell you
directly," he said. "You've already grasped the essential fact--our
Tareeg captors, for the most part, are dead. They were killed, with
some careful assistance from the men in charge of this expedition, by a
weapon developed approximately twelve centuries ago on their ancestral
world. A world which still circles today, though in a rather badly
disintegrated condition, about the Cassa sun....

"But let's be seated, if you will. You gave me a very unpleasant
fright just now." Dr. Clingman touched the side of his face. "I had an
ear shot off recently by a man who didn't wait to have the situation
explained to him. His aim, fortunately, was imperfect. And there is
still a minor war in progress on the _Atlas_. Oh, nothing to worry
about now--it's almost over. I heard less than twenty minutes ago that
the last of the Tareeg guards on board had surrendered. About fifty of
them have become our prisoners. Then there is a rather large group of
armed men in spacesuits in one section of the ship with whom we have
been unable to communicate. They regard us as traitors to the race,
Dr. Dexter and myself in particular. But we have worked out a system
of light signals which should tell them enough to make them willing to
parlay...."

He settled himself carefully into the big chair, turning a white,
fatigued face back to Troy. "That," he said, waving his pudgy hand at
the wall-speaker, "is a talk I made up to explain what actually has
happened to the main body of the mutineers. They comprised a large
majority of the crew and of the expedition members, of course, but
fortunately we were able to gas most of them into unconsciousness
almost at once, so that no further lives have been lost. We have begun
to arouse them again in small groups who are told immediately that the
space ice we were bringing in to Cassa One carried a component which
has resulted in the destruction of the Tareeg force, and who are then
given as much additional information as is needed to answer their
general questions and convince them that we are still qualified to
command the Cassa Expedition. I believe that in a few more days normal
conditions on the ship will have been restored...."

Clingman glanced over at the smoldering cigarette in the tray, stubbed
it out and lit another. "We had been aware for some time of your
plan to escape back to Earth in one of the Tareeg drones," he said.
"It was an audacious and ingenious scheme which might very well have
succeeded. We decided to let you go ahead with it, since it was by no
means certain until the very last day that our own plans would be an
unqualified success. On the other hand, we couldn't let you leave too
early because the Tareegs certainly would have taken the _Atlas_ to
the twin worlds then without completing the Cassa One operation. And
we didn't care to let you in on our secret, for reasons I'm sure you
understand."

Troy nodded. "If they'd got on to me, I might have spilled that, too."

"Exactly," Clingman said. "There was no question of your loyalty or
determination but the Tareegs' methods of persuasion might cause the
most stubborn man to tell more than he should. So no one who was not
essential to the work was given any information whatever. Dr. Rojas
applied certain medical measures which prevented Mr. Newland from
recovering prematurely ... prematurely from our point of view, that
is. It did not keep you from completing your other preparations but
ensured that you would not actually leave unless we believed the move
had become necessary, as a last resort."

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy shook his head. He'd been working against something there had been
no way of knowing about. "Was that Rojas waiting for me in the tunnel?"

"Yes. At that point, we knew we would win, and it had become safe
enough to tell you. Unfortunately, you believed it was a trap."

Troy chewed his lip. "On that home-world of the Tareegs when the two
factions were fighting--the losing side did something which blasted the
whole planet apart?"

"Not exactly," Clingman said. "The appearance of it is rather that the
home-world came apart in an almost gentle manner, section separating
from section. How that could be done is something no one on Earth had
worked out at the time we left. The original survey group brought back
samples of the asteroid swarm for analysis. A good deal was learned
from them."

He paused, frowning at his cigarette, said slowly, "The twin worlds
have developed a new scientific Tareeg caste which was considered--or
considered itself--too valuable to be risked on the interstellar
expedition to the Cassa system. I think that was a very fortunate
circumstance for us. Even before we left Earth, even when it was
believed they were all dead, what had been deduced of the Tareeg genius
for destruction was more than a little disturbing. The apparent purpose
of that last defensive action on the home-world was to strip the
surface oceans from the hostile sections of the planet. Obviously, the
process got out of hand; the entire planet was broken up instead. But
one can't really doubt that--given more time--they would have learned
to master the weapon.

"The killing agent developed by the opposing side evidently had been
very thoroughly mastered. And again we can't say how they did it.
It can be described as a large protein molecule, but its properties
can be imagined only as arising out of a very complex organization,
theoretically impossible at that level of life. It is confined
to water, but its method of dispersion within that medium is not
understood at all. At one instant, it is here; at the next, it
apparently will have moved to a point perhaps several hundred miles
away. It is life which has no existence, and cannot exist, except as
a weapon. Unlike a parasite, its purpose is simply to kill, quickly
and efficiently, and go on at once to another victim. Having exhausted
the store of victims--a short process, obviously, even in an area of
planetary dimensions--it dies of something like starvation within days.

"That, of course, was as practical a limitation to those employing it
as the one that it attacks only Tareegs. They did not want to be barred
indefinitely from an area which had been cleansed of their enemies,
and neither did they want food animals in that area to be destroyed.
They...."

His voice trailed off, and Troy stirred restlessly. Dr. Clingman was
slumped farther down in his chair now, and the pale, protruding eyes
had begun to blink drowsily. He seemed about to go to sleep. Troy said,
"If the thing killed the Tareegs on Cassa One inside an hour after
they'd gone into the sea, then they couldn't have had the time to start
the interstellar drones back towards the twin worlds."

Clingman's head turned to him again. "No," Clingman said. "Of course
not."

"And even," Troy went on, "if they had been able to ship a couple of
loads of infected water back, it would have been harmless long before
it reached their worlds."

       *       *       *       *       *

Clingman nodded. "Quite harmless. As harmless as the new ocean on Cassa
One would be by this time to Tareegs who entered it." He paused. "We'd
thought, Gordon ... as you might be thinking now ... of sending the
drones back instead with a load of asteroid ice containing the inert
agent. That, of course, would not have reduced its effectiveness.
Nevertheless, the scheme wouldn't have worked."

"Why not?" Troy asked.

"Because the drones, in the Tareeg view, were sacred messengers. They
could be used only to announce in a certain prescribed manner that the
Tareeg interstellar expeditionary force had discovered a water planet
and taken possession of it, again with the required ceremony, for the
twin worlds. The transmission of lumps of interplanetary ice would
never have fitted that picture, would, in fact, have been an immediate
warning that something very much out of order had occurred.

"That Tareeg insistence on exact ritualistic procedure--essentially a
defensive measure in their dealings with one another--also happened to
delay our own plans here very badly. Except for it, we would have been
ready at least a year ago to flood Cassa One and entrap our captors."

Troy repeated, stunned, "You would have been ready...."

"Yes, but consider what might have resulted from that over-hasty
action. The Cassa system is much more readily accessible from the
twin worlds than it is from Earth, and if we made some mistake with
the drones, or if the Tareegs began to suspect for any other reason
that their expeditionary force had met with disaster, they would be
certain to establish themselves at once in a very strong manner here,
leaving Earth confronted with a dangerously talented and implacable
new enemy. No, we had to retain the appearance of helplessness until
we had acquired an exact understanding of the manner in which the
water-message must be prepared, and had discovered some substitute for
the freezing effect on the lethal agent. That took an extra year."

Troy said carefully, "And during that year, as you knew would happen,
another dozen or so men died very slow and painful deaths on the
Tareeg execution benches. Any one of those men might have been you or
I...."

"That is quite true," Clingman said. "But it was something that could
not be avoided. In that time, we _did_ learn the necessary ritual and
we _did_ find a numbing catalyst which will hold the protein agent
inert until it loses its effect by being sufficiently diluted again.
So now the drones have been dispatched. Long before this ship reaches
Earth again, the agent will have been introduced to the twin worlds,
and except for the specimens we carry on board, the Tareeg species will
be extinct. It may not be a pleasant thing to have a pair of ghost
worlds forever a little on our conscience--but one does not have to
fight uncertain wars with ghosts."

Troy studied him in silence for some seconds.

"And I thought you were soft," he said at last. "I thought you were
weak and soft...."


                                THE END




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEFT HAND, RIGHT HAND ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


